phagocytic removal of injured cells. Yet, the translocation of membrane PS residues from the inner cellular membrane to the outer surface appears to be essential for the removal of apoptotic cells (Fadok et al., 2001 and Kang et al., 2003b; Maiese and Vincent, 2000). The phospholipids of the plasma membrane are normally in an asymmetric pattern with the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane consisting primarily of choline-containing lipids, such as phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin, and the inner leaflets consisting of aminophospholipids that include phosphatidylethanolamine and PS. The loss of membrane phospholipid asymmetry leads to the externalization of membrane PS residues and serves to identify cells for phagocytosis (Chong et al., 2003d; Hoffmann et al., 2001 and Kang et al., 2003b; Maiese and Chong, 2003).

Expression of the phosphatidylserine receptor (PSR) on microglia also functions with cellular membrane PS externalization to activate microglia. Cells, such as neurons or ECs, exposed to ROS can lead to the induction of both microglial activation and microglial PSR expression. Treatment with an anti-PSR neutralizing antibody in microglia prevents this microglial activation (Chong et al., 2003b; Kang et al., 2003a) and application of PS directly results in microglial activation that can be blocked by a PSR neutralizing antibody (Chong et al., 2003b; Kang et al., 2003b), suggesting that both PS exposure in target cells and PSR expression in microglia are necessary for microglial recognition of apoptotic cells in the nervous system. Recognition of cellular membrane PS by the PS-specific receptors on microglia may require cofactors, such as Gas6 (Nakano et al., 1997) or other agents, such as integrin and lectin (Witting et al., 2000).

Although microglia may assist with the removal of injured cells and cellular debri, these cellular scavengers of the brain may sometimes aggravate tissue inflammation. Studies with microglia stimulated by phorbol myristate acetate have demonstrated the release of superoxide radicals. Application of scavenger agents for ROS, such as SOD or deferoxamine mesylate, in the presence of activated microglia can prevent cellular injury. These studies suggest that oxidative stress generated by microglia can be responsible for cellular injury (Tanaka et al., 1994).

Microglia may lead to cellular damage in disease entities, not only through the generation of ROS products (Sankarapandi et al., 1998) but also through the production of cytokines and the demise of neighboring neurons and ECs (Benzing et al., 1999 and Mehlhorn et al., 2000). In HD and ALS, significant microglial activation has been reported in regions of the nervous system that are specific for these disease entities (Obal et al., 2001 and Singhrao et al., 1999). During ischemic injury to cells, activation of microglia can parallel the induction of cellular apoptosis and correlate well with the severity of the ischemic insult (Chong et al., 2004a; Kang et al., 2003b). Microglia promote the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and interleukin-1ß, free radicals such as NO and superoxide (Sankarapandi et al., 1998), and fatty acid metabolites such as eicosanoids that can precipitate cell death (Liu and Hong, 2003). TNF-a production by microglia may be linked to neurodegeneration by increasing the sensitivity of neurons to free radical exposure (Combs et al., 2001).

In several neurodegenerative diseases, microglial activation has been identified through glial cultures in autopsy specimens (Lue et al., 1996). For example, expression of markers that are indicative of microglial activation was found to be significantly increased in patients with AD (Rogers and Lue, 2001). Application of a position emission tomography marker [11C](R)-PK11195 for microglial activation in patients with mild and early AD also has demonstrated microglial activation in regions of the entorhinal, parietal, and cingulate cortex, suggesting that microglial activation is an early event in the pathogenesis of the disease (Cagnin et al., 2001).

One of the major pathogens of AD, namely Aß, has been shown to lead to inflammatory cell injury through a variety of routes. Aß can not only precipitate a significant inflammatory response with microglial activation and the secretion of TNF-a (Bornemann et al., 2001), but also Aß can elicit the neuronal expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase, peroxynitrite production, and neuronal apoptosis during an acute inflammatory response (Combs et al., 2001). Microglial cells also co-localize with the perivascular deposits of Aß and microglial activation correlates with the development of amyloid plaques (Sheng et al., 1997). Ultrastructural three-dimensional reconstruction of human amyloid plaques in different stages of development illustrates that the number of microglia parallels a progressive increase in fibrillar deposition and the size of fibrillar plaque (Wegiel et al., 2000). The generation of ROS by microglia during events such as Aß deposition suggests that microglia may play an important role during the development of neurodegenerative diseases.

5. Attempted cell cycle induction in post-mitotic cells
The attempted reentrance into the cell cycle in post-mitotic neurons can trigger apoptosis (Becker and Bonni, 2004). In the CNS, post-mitotic neurons are incapable of differentiation, but they continue to possess the ability to enter into the cell cycle. During a cellular insult, deregulation of cell cycle proteins, such as cyclin, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK), and the retinoblastoma protein, can ensue (Padmanabhan et al., 1999). The deficiency of several essential components for the complete execution of the cell cycle in post-mitotic neurons is believed to be deleterious to neurons. Several studies have provided direct evidence that cell cycle induction in post-mitotic neurons can activate cellular mechanisms that lead to neuronal apoptosis (El-Khodor et al., 2003, Ino and Chiba, 2001, Konishi and Bonni, 2003, Lin et al., 2001, Rideout et al., 2003 and Tetsu and McCormick, 1999). Investigations that examine ROS as a stimulus for cell cycle induction reveal that distinct components of apoptotic injury, membrane PS exposure and genomic DNA fragmentation, occur in concert with early and late phases of cell cycle induction (Lin et al., 2001).

Oxidative injury associated with ROS may lead to attempted cell cycle induction in neurons. The induction of oxidative stress in sympathetic neurons by either dopamine, which produces free radicals during its metabolism, or by hydrogen peroxide leads to the increased expression of cell cycle related genes that include cyclin B and CDK5 prior to the induction of neuronal apoptosis (Shirvan et al., 1998). Furthermore, antioxidants that include N-acetyl-l-cysteine (LNAC) and N-acetyl-d-cysteine (DNAC) can prevent DNA fragmentation during trophic factor deprivation through mechanisms that may involve the inhibition of cell cycle progression in neuronal cell lines (Ferrari et al., 1995).

Acute injury paradigms have suggested a potential role for ill-fated cell cycle induction in neurons. Cell cycle proteins (cyclin A, cyclin D, CDK2, CDK4) have been co-localized with apoptotic cells following middle cerebral artery occlusion (Li et al., 1997b). Although evidence for cell cycle induction during cerebral ischemia may be partially associated with neurogenesis (Taguchi et al., 2004), ischemic insults also can lead to aberrant cell cycle induction that may have ramifications for both acute and long-term consequences on cellular function (Wen et al., 2004).

Other neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD, also appear to rely upon attempted cell cycle induction, at least in part, to yield subsequent neuronal cell loss (Arendt et al., 2000, Busser et al., 1998, Maiese, 2001 and Raina et al., 2000). In clinical specimens from AD patients, the cell cycle regulators P16 and CDK4 have increased expression in regions such as the hippocampus (McShea et al., 1997). In addition, expression of other components of the cell cycle, such as cyclin D, CDK4, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), and cyclin B1 have been shown to be present in patients with AD in regions that include the hippocampus, subiculum, locus coeruleus, and dorsal raphe nuclei. A close association appears to exist between injured cells and cell cycle protein expression, since staining for cell cycle proteins have been shown to be absent in brain regions without neuronal injury of AD patients and in age-matched brains (Busser et al., 1998). Increased accumulation of cell cycle kinases, such as CDK5, also has been found in neurons that are developing neurofibrillary tangles (Pei et al., 1998). Interestingly, in patients with mild cognitive impairment, many of which can progress to develop AD (Bennett et al., 2002), cell cycle proteins, such as cyclin D, cyclin B, and PCNA, are significantly increased in the hippocampus and basal nucleus (Yang et al., 2003).

Experimental models of AD have provided further evidence that cell cycle induction in post-mitotic neurons can activate cellular mechanisms that lead to neuronal apoptosis. For example, application of Aß (1–40), Aß (1–42), and its active fragment Aß (25–35) in neurons can result in the induction of cyclin D1, cyclins E and A, and the phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein. The activation of the upstream cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK)4/5/6 appears to be required for the induction of apoptosis in neurons by Aß, since inhibition of CDKs can prevent Aß induced neuronal apoptosis (Alvarez et al., 2001 and Giovanni et al., 1999).

Cell cycle proteins can contribute to neurofibrillary tangle development. Expression of familial AD mutants of the APP in primary neurons can precipitate apoptotic injury through cell cycle induction and p21 mediated pathways (McPhie et al., 2003). CDK5 also has been identified as a critical regulator of the tau protein which leads to neurofibrillary tangles. CDK5 can phosphorylate tau directly (Flaherty et al., 2000). Furthermore, phosphorylation of tau by Aß can be blocked by treatment with antisense against p35, a protein that is cleaved to the truncated form p25 which can activate CDK5. This work provides evidence that Aß requires both the cleavage of p35 and the activation of CDK5 to lead to tau phosphorylation (Town et al., 2002). Correlative work has shown that p25 also accumulates in neurons of patients with AD (Patrick et al., 1999). In addition, overexpression of the p25/Cdk5 complex in cultured primary neurons leads to cytoskeletal disruption, the hyperphosphorylation of tau, and apoptosis (Patrick et al., 1999), suggesting that induction of cell cycle proteins can be a significant precipitant for neuronal degeneration.

6. Induction of the Wnt pathway
Wnt proteins, named after the Drosophilia protein “wingless” and the mouse protein “Int-1”, represent a large family of secreted cysteine-rich glycosylated proteins. This novel family of proteins are intimately involved in cellular signaling pathways that play a role in a variety of processes that involve embryonic cell patterning, proliferation, differentiation, orientation, adhesion, survival, and apoptosis (Chong and Maiese, 2004, Nelson and Nusse, 2004 and Patapoutian and Reichardt, 2000).

Nineteen of the 24 Wnt genes that express Wnt proteins have been identified in the human. In addition, greater than 80 target genes of Wnt signaling pathways have been demonstrated in human, mouse, Drosophilia, Xenopus, and Zebrafish. This representation encompasses several cellular populations, such as neurons, cardiomyocytes, endothelial cells, cancer cells, and pre-adipocytes (Nusse, 1999). Wnt binds to Frizzled transmembrane receptors on the cell surface to activate downstream signaling events (Fig. 1). These involve at least two intracellular signaling pathways that are considered of particular importance. One pathway controls target gene transcription through ß-catenin, generally referred to as the canonical pathway that involves Wnt1, Wnt3a, and Wnt8 and functions through ß-catenin-dependent pathways. Another pathway pertains to intracellular calcium (Ca2+) release which is termed the non-canonical or Wnt/Ca2+ pathway consisting primarily of Wnt4, Wnt5a, and Wnt11 that functions through non-ß-catenin-dependent pathways, such as the planar cell polarity (PCP) pathway and the Wnt-Ca2+-dependent pathways (Kuhl et al., 2000, Nusse, 1999 and Patapoutian and Reichardt, 2000).

Modulation of apoptotic injury by Wnt and Akt pathways. The Wnt canonical ...
Fig. 1. 
Modulation of apoptotic injury by Wnt and Akt pathways. The Wnt canonical signaling pathway is initiated by activation of its transmembrane receptor Frizzled (Friz) and the co-receptor lipoprotein related proteins 5 and 6 (LRP-5/6), resulting in the recruitment and activation of disheveled which inhibits glycogen synthase kinase (GSK)-3ß. When active, GSK-3ß functions with adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and the phosphorylation of Axin to result in ß-catenin phosphorylation and its subsequent degradation. In contrast, free ß-catenin translocates to the nucleus and activates lymphocyte enhancer factor (Lef) and T cell factor (Tcf) to stimulate Wnt-responsive genes. The serine–threonine kinase Akt functions as a downstream target of phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI 3-K). PI 3-K phosphorylates glycerophospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate, yielding phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate (PIP2) and phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3). As a cytosolic protein, Akt translocates to the cell membrane following its binding to PIP2 and PIP3 and becomes activated through phosphorylation by phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1). Wnt also may activate Akt through the Wnt-1 induced secreted protein (WISP-1). Akt targets GSK-3ß through phosphorylation, resulting in the inactivation of GSK-3ß and blocking the degradation of ß-catenin. Furthermore, phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor 2B (eIF2B) is prevented to prevent the release of cytochrome c (Cyto c). In addition, Akt inactivates FOXO3a and Bad to inhibit induction of Bim and restore Bcl-xL function.
Figure options
As one of the best characterized members of the Wnt family, Wnt1 was first identified as a proto-oncogene in mammary carcinomas, but recently has been illustrated to play a critical role in neuronal development (Tang et al., 2002). Wnt functions by binding to the transmembrane receptor Frizzled and the co-receptor lipoprotein related proteins 5 and 6 (LRP-5/6) (Wehrli et al., 2000) followed by recruitment of disheveled, the cytoplasmic bridging molecule, to inhibit glycogen synthase kinase (GSK-3ß) (Ikeda et al., 1998 and Papkoff and Aikawa, 1998). The inhibition of GSK-3ß prevents phosphorylation of ß-catenin and its degradation. The free ß-catenin translocates to the nucleus where it activates lymphocyte enhancer factor (Lef) and T cell factor (Tcf) (Ishitani et al., 2003) leading to stimulation of Wnt-response genes (Fig. 1).

In some cell systems, Wnt1 signaling has been associated with the control of apoptosis. Wnt-1 prevents apoptosis through ß-catenin/Tcf transcription mediated pathways (Chen et al., 2001 and Rhee et al., 2002). Overexpression of exogenous Wnt1 results in the protection of cells against c-myc induced apoptosis through induction of ß-catenin, cyclooxygenase-2, and Wnt1 induced secreted protein (WISP-1) (You et al., 2002). Wnt1 signaling also can inhibit apoptosis through prevention of cytochrome c release from mitochondria and the subsequent inhibition of caspase 9 activation ( Chen et al., 2001). The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, a member of the Wnt pathway, appears to represent another mechanism that regulates PCD. The APC gene functions to cleave ß-catenin leading to the down-regulation of transactivation of Tcf/Lef (Tetsu and McCormick, 1999). Without Tcf/Lef activity, APC is then permitted to increase the activities of caspase 3, caspase 7, and caspase 9 and lead to the cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) to enhance the vulnerability of cells to apoptosis (Chen et al., 2003).

In the nervous system, the non-canonical Wnt pathway has been shown to be expressed in the hippocampus of mice and can increase dendritic branching in cultured neurons (Rosso et al., 2005). Wnt signaling through Wnt1 also is able to guide early neural crest stem cells to develop into sensory neural cells rather than maturing into other potential neural crest cell derivatives (Lee et al., 2004). Yet, in regards to cytoprotection in the brain that involves the Wnt pathway, limited studies are available. The work that is presently available suggests that enhanced Wnt activity may function through several cellular pathways to prevent apoptosis during neuronal or vascular injury. Conditioned media with Wnt3a activity or the application of a GSK-3ß inhibitor can block hydrogen peroxide induced mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptotic DNA fragmentation (Shin et al., 2004). Other work illustrates that Wnt signaling may foster specific protection against cellular destruction and inflammatory injury by maintaining genomic DNA integrity and cellular membrane PS asymmetry (Chong et al., 2004b; Maiese and Vincent, 2000). Wnt1 overexpression in primary hippocampal neurons protects cells against oxidative stress or Aß toxicity that increases cell survival and prevents PS exposure and DNA degradation (Chong et al., 2004b). In addition, agents that combine non-steroidal anti-inflammatory compounds with a cholinesterase inhibitor are believed to prevent neurotoxicity against Aß. The mechanism of protection has been suggested to involve the enhancement of non-amyloidogenic APP cleavage that leads to a decreased production of endogenous Aß through the Wnt pathway (Farias et al., 2005).

Loss of Wnt activity may lead to cellular injury or dysfunction in the CNS during oxidative stress. Wnt1 expression has been demonstrated in the brains of individuals affected by neuropsychiatric disorders (Miyaoka et al., 1999). Furthermore, retinal degeneration during retinitis pigmentosa with the progressive loss of photoreceptors has been associated with increased secretion of Frizzled-related protein-2, a Wnt inhibitory protein, suggesting that loss of Wnt signaling may contribute to retinal neurodegeneration (Jones et al., 2000). Additional work demonstrates that a mutation in the membrane-type Frizzled-related protein gene may be involved in retinal photoreceptor degeneration (Kameya et al., 2002).

During AD, neurotoxicity of Aß in hippocampal neurons has been linked to increased levels of GSK-3ß and loss of ß-catenin. Decreased production of Aß can occur during the enhancement of protein kinase C (PKC) activity (Savage et al., 1998) which may be controlled by the Wnt pathway (Garrido et al., 2002). The proteolytic processing of APP during AD also has been closely linked to the Wnt pathway through presenilin 1 (PS1) and disheveled. PS1 is required for the processing of APP and has been shown to down-regulate Wnt signaling and interact with ß-catenin to promote its turnover (Soriano et al., 2001). Disheveled, a known downstream transducer of Wnt signaling pathway, also can regulate the a-secretase cleavage of APP through PKC/mitogen-activated protein kinase dependent pathways, increasing soluble production of APP (sAPP) (Mudher et al., 2001). Overexpression of mouse disheveled-1 and -2 inhibits GSK-3ß mediated phosphorylation of tau protein and may thus prevent formation of neurofibrillary tangles during AD (Wagner et al., 1997). Thus, disheveled may increase neuronal protection during neurodegenerative disorders through sAPP production and reduction in tau phosphorylation.

7. Akt as an essential regulatory element
7.1. Activation and expression of Akt

Protein kinase B (PKB) is ubiquitously expressed in mammals but is initially present at low levels in the adult brain (Owada et al., 1997). Three family members of this serine/threonine kinase are now known to exist that were termed Akt after the molecular cloning of the oncogene v-Akt and two human homologs ( Staal, 1987 and Staal et al., 1988). They are PKBa or Akt1, PKBß or Akt2, and PKB? or Akt3 (Chong et al., 2005a). Akt is part of the AGC (cAMP-dependent kinase/protein kinase G/protein kinase C) superfamily of protein kinases and consists of three functional domains. The N-terminal pleckstrin homology (PH) domain provides binding sites for membrane phospholipids, which are involved in the recruitment of Akt to the plasma membrane (Frech et al., 1997). The catalytic domain of Akt has specificity for serine or threonine residues of proteins that are substrates for Akt. It is interesting to note that the three isoforms of Akt share the same regulatory phosphorylation sites but that splice variants of Akt that lack the C-terminal hydrophobic motif (HM) possess lower specific activity than full-length isoforms, suggesting that the C-terminal HM is vital to stimulate Akt activity ( Brodbeck et al., 2001 and Yang et al., 2002) (Table 2).

Table 2.
Substrates of Akt that determine apoptotic cell injury
Substrate	Function	Selected references
FOXO3a	Activation leads to apoptotic injury, cell cycle progression; contributes to oxidative stress; possesses caspase 3 cleavage sequence	Brunet et al. (1999); Medema et al. (2000); Kops et al. (2002) and Chong et al. (2004c)

GSK-3ß	Phosphorylates ß-catenin, eIF2B, CREB, and tau protein to result in apoptosis and the formation of neurofibrillary tangles; promotes cytochrome c release, caspase activation	Somervaille et al. (2001); Kirschenbaum et al. (2001); Pap and Cooper (2002) and Koh et al. (2003)

Bad	Oxidative stress activates Bad;, phosphorylation of Bad by Akt blocks apoptotic injury, prevents cytochrome c release	Datta et al. (1997); Simakajornboon et al. (2001); Chong et al. (2003b) and Uchiyama et al. (2004)

NF-?B	Leads to the induction of multiple anti-apoptotic genes; blocks caspase activity; protects through activation of Bcl-xL	Wang et al. (1998); Chen et al., 2000 and Chen et al., 2000; De Smaele et al. (2001) and Tang et al. (2001)
Note: CREB, cAMP-response element-binding protein; eIF2B, the translation initiation factor 2B; GSK-3ß, glycogen synthase kinase-ß; IKK, I?B kinase; JNK, c-Jun-amino terminal kinase; NF-?B, nuclear factor-?B.

Table options
Activation of Akt is dependent upon PI 3-K (Fig. 1). The activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) and the G protein-coupled receptor (CPCR) are required to activate PI 3-K. Trophic factors or cytokines can stimulate the recruitment of PI 3-K to the plasma membrane. Following activation, PI 3-K phosphorylates membrane glycerophospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate [PI(4,5)P2] resulting in the production of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3) and phosphatidylinositol 3,4-bisphosphate (PIP2). Both PIP2 and PIP3 bind with equal affinity to Akt and are required for Akt activation (Thomas et al., 2002). The critical step for activation of Akt is its transition from the cytosol to the plasma membrane, which is accomplished by the binding of Akt to PIP2 and PIP3 through its PH domain (Stephens et al., 1998). As a result of this sequence of events, Akt becomes available for phosphorylation by several upstream kinases.

The phosphorylation of two major residues, Thr308 and Ser473, are considered necessary for the activation of Akt. The site of Thr308 is located within the activation T-loop of Akt1. For Akt2 and Akt3, the equivalent residues are Thr309 and Thr305, respectively (Walker et al., 1998). These phosphorylation sites are believed to be critical for the activation of Akt. Yet, the phosphorylation of Ser473 at the C-terminal HM domain also is necessary for the complete activation of Akt (Bellacosa et al., 1998). The phosphorylation of Thr308 is dependent upon its upstream kinase, 3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDK1) (Wick et al., 2000). PDK1 cannot directly phosphorylate Ser473, but a distinct phosphoinositide-dependent kinase PDK2 (Ser473 kinase) has been postulated to promote Akt phosphorylation on Ser473. The existence of PDK2 is pending further confirmation.

A number of pathways can control the biological activity of Akt. Some lipid phosphatases have been shown to negatively modulate the activity of Akt. The phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted from chromosome 10 (PTEN) appears to be a critical regulator of PI 3-K signaling. PTEN can dephosphorylate tyrosine-, serine-, and threonine-phosphorylated peptides (Lee et al., 1999). PTEN negatively regulates PI 3-K pathways by specifically dephosphorylating PIP2 and PIP3 at the D3 position (Maehama and Dixon, 1998). As a result, a reduction in the membrane phospholipid pool that is necessary for the recruitment of Akt can ensue during PTEN activity.

Other lipid phosphatases, such as SHIP (SH2 domain-containing inositol phosphatase), can regulate Akt activity. SHIP is an inositol 5'-phosphatase that dephosphorylates inositides and phosphoinositides on the 5'-position resulting in the transformation of PIP3 into PIP2. The SHIP2 gene appears to modulate insulin signaling, since targeted disruption of this gene leads to increased insulin sensitivity that occurs as a result of enhanced phosphorylation of Akt2 at the plasma membrane (Sasaoka et al., 2004). In other cell systems that involve hematopoietic proliferation, SHIP also functions to block activation of Akt (Carver et al., 2000). The Src homology domain 2 (SH2)-containing tyrosine phosphatases (SHP) also have been implicated in the control of the Akt pathway. In regards to SHP1 and SHP2, SHP1 is predominantly expressed in hematopoietic cells, but SHP2 is more ubiquitously expressed and occurs in the nervous system (Chong et al., 2003f). Through the activation of Akt, SHP1 can selectively bind and dephosphorylate PTEN to reduce the stability of this protein (Lu et al., 2003). SHP2 also appears to modulate the activation of Akt (Ivins Zito et al., 2004) to prevent cellular death from apoptosis through inhibition of either caspase 1- or 3-like activities (Chong et al., 2003f; Ivins Zito et al., 2004).

Alternate cellular systems are responsible for the enhancement of Akt activity. Carboxyl-terminal modulator protein (CTMP) also can negatively regulate the activity of Akt. CTMP is a 27 kDa protein that binds specifically to the carboxyl-terminal regulatory domain of Akt1 at the plasma membrane (Maira et al., 2001). The binding of CTMP to Akt1 decreases the activity of Akt1 by inhibiting the phosphorylation of Akt1 on Ser473 and Thr308 (Maira et al., 2001). The T cell leukemia/lymphoma 1 (TCL1) protein functions as a co-activator of Akt. TCL1 can stabilize mitochondrial membrane potential and promote cell proliferation and survival (Laine et al., 2000). TCL1 binds to Akt1 and increases Akt1 kinase activity to promote its nuclear translocation (Pekarsky et al., 2000). Additional work has shown that TCL1 binds to the PH domain of Akt and the formation of TCL1 trimers facilitate the formation of the Akt/TCL1 complex. Within this complex, Akt is phosphorylated and activated in vivo (Laine et al., 2000).

Akt activity also can be facilitated by a 90 kDa heat shock protein (Hsp90). Hsps are characterized by their mass in kilodaltons, are induced in response to heat in essentially all organisms, and are highly conserved between different species. Hsps, such as Hsp90, can be cytoprotective, such as preventing cell injury against heat thermal stress (Beere et al., 2000, Kalwy et al., 2003 and Latchman, 2004). Akt binds to Hsp90 through its 229–309 residues resulting in stabilization of the phosphorylated Akt. Inhibition of Akt binding to Hsp90 leads to dephosphorylation of Akt by protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) and induction of apoptosis (Sato et al., 2000). Intracellular Akt also can become complexed with Hsp90 and Cdc37. As a result of this association, increased Akt activity is present but is closely dependent upon the presence of Hsp90 in the complex (Basso et al., 2002).

The cellular expression of Akt can vary in a variety of tissues and cells. Akt1 is the most highly expressed isoform. Although Akt2 is expressed at a lower level than Akt1, significant expression of Akt2 occurs in insulin-responsive tissues, such as skeletal muscle, liver, heart, kidney, and adipose tissue (Altomare et al., 1995). In the CNS, the expression of Akt1 and Akt2 can be observed at increased levels during development but is gradually decreased during postnatal development (Owada et al., 1997). Yet, in the adult brain, expression of Akt1 and Akt2 is initially weak with a dramatic increase in the expression of Akt1 mRNA and Akt1 protein in cells that are subjected to injury (Chong et al., 2004a; Kang et al., 2003b; Owada et al., 1997), suggesting that Akt may play an important role during cell injury. In contrast to Akt1 and Akt2, Akt3 is expressed only in a limited number of tissues, such as in the brain and testes, with lower expression evident in skeletal muscle, pancreas, heart, and kidney (Nakatani et al., 1999).

7.2. Akt as a modulator apoptotic injury and inflammation during ROS exposure

Akt is a critical survival factor that can modulate cellular pathways in both the central and peripheral nervous systems. Early studies have demonstrated that overexpression of Akt in CNS neurons prevents apoptosis during growth factor withdrawal (Datta et al., 1997). Similar investigations that employed superior cervical ganglion neurons also illustrated that Akt was necessary to prevent cell death during nerve growth factor withdraw (Philpott et al., 1997). Additional studies have shown that Akt can be both necessary and sufficient for the survival of neurons, since expression of a dominant-negative Akt or inhibition of PI 3-K yields apoptotic cell death during trophic factor administration (Crowder and Freeman, 1998) and precipitates cell death during oxidative stress (Kang et al., 2003a and Kang et al., 2003b). Akt also impacts upon the function and survival of cerebral vascular ECs. Recent investigations have shown that Akt modulates cerebral blood flow and vasomotor tone (Luo et al., 2000) and prevents apoptotic injury during compromises in mitochondrial function and caspase regulation (Chong et al., 2002b and Chong et al., 2004a). Further work has illustrated an important role for Akt for the survival of cells during a number of injury paradigms. Enhanced Akt activity can foster cell survival during free radical exposure (Chong et al., 2003b; Matsuzaki et al., 1999), matrix detachment (Rytomaa et al., 2000), neuronal axotomy (Namikawa et al., 2000), DNA damage (Chong et al., 2002b and Chong et al., 2004a; Henry et al., 2001 and Kang et al., 2003a), anti-Fas antibody administration (Suhara et al., 2001), oxidative stress (Chong et al., 2003b; Kang et al., 2003a and Kang et al., 2003b; Yamaguchi and Wang, 2001), hypoxic preconditioning (Wick et al., 2002), Aß exposure (Martin et al., 2001), and transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) application (Conery et al., 2004).

Akt possesses the ability to offer a broad level of cytoprotection in cells through both intrinsic cell mechanisms that involve the maintenance of genomic DNA and the exposure of membrane PS residues. Through the overexpression of a myristoylated (active) form of Akt and a kinase-deficient dominant-negative Akt, recent work has shown that Akt is both necessary and sufficient to protect cells, such as neurons and ECs from injury associated with oxidative stress (Chong et al., 2003b; Kang et al., 2003a and Kang et al., 2003b). Overexpression of myr-Akt significantly protects cells from free radical injury and prevents degradation of genomic DNA (Fig. 2). Yet, cells with a dominant-negative overexpression that lack kinase activity suffer a significant loss in cell survival during oxidative stress. Further studies have suggested that through the inhibition of PI 3-K phosphorylation of Akt or through the overexpression of a kinase-deficient dominant-negative Akt, endogenous cellular reserves of Akt also can provide an additional level of protection during cell injury that can function in concert with the exogenous activation of Akt to achieve increased cellular protection (Chong et al., 2004a; Kang et al., 2003a and Kang et al., 2003b). It is important to note that activation of Akt is not always desirable. Under some conditions, enhanced cellular survival during Akt activation in cells that are targeted for destruction, such as in neoplastic cells, could undermine treatment as well as foster the growth of a neoplasm. As a result, recent work has identified Akt as a potential target to block during the treatment of non-small cell lung cancers that contain mutations in the epidermal growth factor (Sordella et al., 2004).

Overexpression of Akt1 prevents cellular injury and DNA degradation during ...
Fig. 2. 
Overexpression of Akt1 prevents cellular injury and DNA degradation during oxidative stress. Representative images illustrate DNA fragmentation with TUNEL and cell survival with a trypan blue dye exclusion (TB) methods in both wild-type and myristolated (myr)-Akt1 (active Akt1) transfected cerebral microvascular endothelial cells (ECs) 24 h following exposure to a NO donor (NOC-9, 1000 µM). NO induced DNA fragmentation and TB staining was evident in wild-type cells (wild-type/NO), but is absent in cells overexpressing Akt1 (myr-Akt1/NO).
Figure options
Akt prevents inflammatory cell demise through extrinsic cellular mechanisms that involve membrane PS exposure and the subsequent activation of microglia. Enhanced Akt activity can prevent cellular membrane PS externalization in both neurons and ECs during a variety of insults that involve anoxia, free radical exposure, and oxygen-glucose deprivation (Chong et al., 2002b and Chong et al., 2004a; Maiese et al., 2004). In addition, Akt appears to employ the modulation of membrane PS externalization to prevent microglial activation (Kang et al., 2003b). Activation of Akt can prevent membrane PS exposure on injured cells and block the activation of microglia that are exposed to media taken from cells that overexpress active, phosphorylated Akt during cellular injury (Kang et al., 2003a and Kang et al., 2003b). Cytoprotective agents, such as nicotinamide and erythropoietin (EPO), also employ mechanisms that involve Akt to regulate microglial activation and proliferation (Chong et al., 2003d; Li et al., 2004b; Maiese et al., 2004). These protective agents block membrane PS exposure on cells and possibly prevent the shedding of membrane PS residues that is known to occur during apoptosis (Simak et al., 2002). In addition to targeting the activity of membrane PS exposure and microglial activation, Akt also may directly address cellular inflammation by inhibiting several pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-a (Fontaine et al., 2002).

In addition to its ability to protect cells against apoptotic and inflammatory injury, Akt can function to either reduce or prevent cellular destruction from ROS. For example, ROS generated by hydrogen peroxide can lead to the endogenous activation of Akt in several cell lines such as Hela, A549, and MCF-7 cells (Wang et al., 2000). In human glioblastoma cell lines, hydrogen peroxide also leads to a marked phosphorylation of Akt (Sonoda et al., 1999). Generation of peroxynitrite by sodium nitrite and acidic hydrogen peroxide also results in a time and dose-dependent activation of Akt followed by inactivation of GSK-3ß in human skin primary fibroblast cells (Klotz et al., 2000). Akt activation during ROS in several neuronal and vascular cell systems has been demonstrated in neuronal cell lines (Kang et al., 2003a and Kang et al., 2003b; Salinas et al., 2003), primary hippocampal and cortical neurons (Chong et al., 2003b and Chong et al., 2003e; Crossthwaite et al., 2002 and Matsuzaki et al., 1999) and cerebral vascular ECs (Chong et al., 2002b and Chong et al., 2004a).

7.3. Akt can provide the stimulus for altering the course of neurodegenerative disease

As a result of the broad protective nature of Akt, it may come as no surprise to learn that many agents or growth factors appear to prevent apoptotic cellular injury through Akt activation. In the vascular system, angiopoietin-1 is an endothelium-specific ligand essential for embryonic vascular stabilization, branching, morphogenesis, and post-natal angiogenesis. Angiopoietin-1 also supports endothelial cell survival and prevents apoptosis through the activation of Akt that requires a PI 3-K dependent pathway (Papapetropoulos et al., 2000). Furthermore, in the cardiovascular system, myocardial protection by insulin during myocardial ischemia/reperfusion is abolished by PI 3-K inhibition, suggesting that cardioprotection of insulin is mediated by Akt activation (Jonassen et al., 2001 and Li et al., 2004a; Maiese et al., 2005). The involvement of the PI 3-K/Akt pathway also has been demonstrated during the protection of retinal ganglion cells from axotomy (Kermer et al., 2000).

A number of trophic factors and cytokines, such as EPO, may depend upon Akt to offer cellular protection (Maiese et al., 2003). EPO can phosphorylate Akt and is dependent upon the activation of PI 3-K and Janus kinase 2 (Jak2) (Chong et al., 2002b; Witthuhn et al., 1993). Activation of Jak2 promotes the phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in the intracellular portion of the EPO receptor (Witthuhn et al., 1993). Phosphorylation of the last tyrosine of the EPO receptor initiates binding of the 85 kDa regulatory subunit of PI 3-K, a heterodimer consisting of a 110 kDa catalytic subunit and an 85 kDa regulatory subunit. As a result of the binding of the 85 kDa regulatory subunit, the 110 kDa catalytic subunit becomes active and leads to the phosphorylation of Akt.

Central to the ability of EPO to prevent cellular apoptosis is the activation of Akt by EPO (Maiese et al., 2004). During anoxia or free radical exposure, expression of the active form of Akt (phospho-Akt) is increased (Kang et al., 2003a and Kang et al., 2003b). EPO can significantly enhance the activity of Akt during oxidative stress and prevent inflammatory activation of microglia (Chong et al., 2003a, Chong et al., 2003b and Chong et al., 2003e). This up-regulation of Akt activity during injury paradigms appears to be vital for EPO protection, since prevention of Akt phosphorylation blocks cellular protection by EPO (Chong et al., 2003a, Chong et al., 2003b and Chong et al., 2003e). Through the regulation of the PI 3-K/Akt dependent pathway, EPO can prevent cellular apoptosis following N-methyl-d-aspartate toxicity (Dzietko et al., 2004), hypoxia (Chong et al., 2002b), and oxidative stress ( Chong et al., 2003a, Chong et al., 2003b and Chong et al., 2003e).

Given the intimate association between Akt and cytoprotective agents, Akt may be viewed as an essential target for therapeutic strategies against a number of diseases that involve apoptotic cell death. The association of familial AD with mutations in APP suggests that wild-type APP may have a protective ability against toxic insults to cells, since mutations in APP impair its ability to offer resistance against oxidative stress. Recent work has suggested that protection by wild-type APP against ROS may require the PI 3-K/Akt pathway, since dominant-negative forms of Akt eliminated the protective capacity of wild-type APP (Kashour et al., 2003). Furthermore, overexpression of Akt1 can attenuate apoptosis during Aß exposure (Martin et al., 2001). In models of Parkinson's disease that employ the neurotoxin 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+), apoptosis was prevented and a reduction in ROS was observed in cells overexpressing an active form of Akt (Salinas et al., 2001).

Activation of Akt during acute cellular insults also appears to be necessary to foster cell survival. Phosphorylation of Akt has been observed in the brain following either focal or global cerebral ischemia (Friguls et al., 2001 and Yano et al., 2001). Sublethal ischemic induction during pre-conditioning experiments leads to the phosphorylation of Akt in the hippocampal CA1 region. This activation of Akt was not present in ischemic animals that did not receive sublethal ischemic preconditioning and led to a greater degree of cerebral infarction, suggesting that Akt activation provides an important mechanism for ischemic preconditioning (Yano et al., 2001). Cell culture experiments also have supported that hypoxic preconditioning may be mediated by the activation of Akt (Wick et al., 2002).

8. Downstream cellular targets
At this point of time, no definitive therapy for either acute or chronic neurodegenerative diseases is available. Yet, investigations into the cellular pathways that determine oxidative stress and apoptotic injury have begun to elucidate pathways that provide us with a clearer understanding of the mechanisms that determine a cell's ability to function and sustain itself during adverse environments. In the following sections, we discuss novel downstream cellular pathways that are linked to neurodegenerative disorders that involve the Forkhead family of transcription factors, the glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß), the cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB), Bad, I?B kinase (IKK), mitochondrial dysfunction, caspases, and calpains. Further knowledge of these processes may ultimately identify unique therapeutic strategies against oxidative stress that involve cellular metabolism, genomic DNA repair, metabotropic glutamate modulation, and cytokine activity.

8.1. The Forkhead transcription factors

Three members of the mammalian Forkhead family have been identified and consist of the Forkhead in rhabdomyosarcoma (FKHR, also named as FOXO1), the FKHRL-like 1 (FKHRL1, FOXO3a), and the acute-lymphocytic-leukemia-1 fused gene from chromosome X (AFX, also named as FOXO4). The Forkhead family is characterized by the Forkhead box or winged helix that contains a 110 amino acid binding domain. Upon activation such as during oxidative stress, the Forkhead family members are translocated to the nucleus. They function as transcription factors by preferentially binding to the core consensus DNA sequence 5'-TTGTTTAG-3', the Forkhead response element. The cellular function of Forkhead family is broad and is involved in cell processes such as apoptotic injury (Gilley et al., 2003), cell cycle progression (Schmidt et al., 2002), oxidative stress (Kops et al., 2002), and the longevity of an organism (Taub et al., 1999).